\section{What problems are there with microworlds?}

Let's imagine that microworlds - virtual, physical and hybrid - are
adopted in the mainstream curricula of schools and universities
worldwide. What consequences would this have for the structure of
education?

\subsection{Fully embracing microworlds}

As discussed in the previous section, lectures could remain relatively
unchanged, with the difference being that they are no longer mandatory,
but can be voluntarily attended by students undertaking self-directed
research. These lectures could still be labelled by subject in the same
way as today, for example: the biology of psychopathy is Natural
Science; the ethics of violence is a Social Science; and the literature
of crime is Art. The reasoning behind this is that the label
simply dictates the \emph{angle} the subject will be approached from. As
lectures are voluntary, students can mix and match these angles as they
wish.

Instead of producing work within a subject area such as Biology,
Philosophy or English Literature, students would then apply their
knowledge by exploring microworlds that span multiple subject areas.

Their aim would be to create public entities that can be peer-evaluated, by the
consumption of the work by a student's peers, and the sharing and
discussion it generates. A possible work could be creating an
interactive virtual environment, like a game, where players explore the
concept of psychopathy, from a biological, ethical and literary
perspective.

This could be something like a point-and-click adventure where you play
a psychopath, and perceive the world as a student believes a psychopath
would. The student who built the game would have to study biological,
psychological and literary work on psychopathy to create a realistic
world. The student could then explore ethical questions by offering
players choices about how to behave. The resulting narrative in the game
world would demonstrate students' literary abilities.

For variety, students could work on multiple projects in multiple
microworlds, all with different themes, at the same time during a term.
Every so often, a project would come to an end, and students' work would
be presented in an exhibition and peer-evaluated.

After one set of projects have been evaluated, a new set of projects, in
their own specifically-designed microworlds, would begin.

\subsection{From lesson plans to microworld construction}

If lessons are replaced with microworlds, those microworlds will have to
be constructed. Physical microworlds, like jamming with instruments or
creative writing on paper can be constructed by teachers today.

Virtual or hybrid microworlds are harder to construct without technical
skills. \emph{Talking to Machines} and \emph{Narrative Roulette} had to
be programmed specifically - they had too many custom requirements to be
put together from a standard system.

I believe I gained the majority of the skills required to program those
microworlds from working in the software industry, not from my Computer
Science education. This means that it takes software industry experience
to construct microworlds - something which the vast majority of teachers
do not currently have.

Even if the construction of microworlds were outsourced to the software
industry, teachers would need considerable experience with those
microworlds to help and advise students on how to best explore them. As
most microworlds are complex software artifacts, this is no
easy task.
