# Narrative Roulette at Kungsholmens Gymnasium

STRUCTURE:
* Decided to keep the *mechanisms* of the shape-drawing microworld, but change to a domain where users already have knowledge of vocabulary and syntax: producing natural language.
* To increase the amount of creativity offered, we chose the domain of **fiction** instead of non-fiction, unlike most assignments.
* Describe idea, implementation, evaluation loop
	* idea in head
	* implementation = narrative
	* evaluation = reading and discussing in groups
* iterations:
	* create characters
	* create actions
	* create responses
	* change character in response to actions
	* modify actions, characters, responses etc
	* modified text is reified thought-exploration of domain
	* FUTURE WORK: record modifications
* each round of Narrative Roulette: come up with an idea in the given domain, write a narrative, read others and discussing them = learning.
* successes: 
	* engagement
	* value created (made students think)
* limitations:
	* would have been great to have more time
	* so... let's try and put it online!

---- ----------------
* A creative writing workshop without constraints: the virtual microworld is our perception of reality, and we experiment using language (narrative theory).
* Tech enabled the anonymity
* Tech enabled so much work to be created, shared so quickly etc
* Did it work? 
* Was it engaging? Yes.
* Did it allow for experimentation? Yes. (especially the anonymity!)
* Did it give rich feedback? Yes. (especially the anonymity!)
