# Narrative Roulette on the Web

STRUCTURE:
* same as before, but online instead of in a classroom
* idea, implementation, evaluation loop
	* idea (rounds lasted a week)
	* implementation: write on a computer. UNLIKE BEFORE: do it OUTSIDE a classroom.
	* evaluation: share on facebook
* Differences:
	* idea: one-week rounds allowed one person to try multiple narratives for the same perspective.
	* implementation: outside the classroom means you need FAR MORE motivation to write. You need to give up your own spare time to write, instead of spending school/compulsory time doing it. =\> only people who already have a great interest in writing creatively will do it.
	* evaluation: harder to make people read things when it pops up, unattributed, on Facebook.
* Results: seemed to be less engaging than in the classroom: 
	* fewer writers took part
	* less sharing (evaluation)
* BUT: repackaging of my own narratives
	* Added titles
	* Added cover images
	* Added taglines
	* Added my own name
	* Made it much easier to share 
		* made it something you *want* to share
	* use click for the next message style
	* =\> "annie96 is typing" mega-hit, more than 100K likes
	* also got \~40 likes on traditional narratives
* Conclusion:
	* web version is more niche: requires more effort on the part of the writer (lacks the authority of the physical classroom)
	* BUT: potential for far bigger audience (the whole world)

---- -------------------

* Web version was far less engaging than the classroom version.
* =\> Maybe we need the authority and distraction-free environment of a classroom to get students to focus on writing their narratives?
* =\> Counter-point: Preliminary results from Stories For Your Screen suggest that people would write narratives if they were in dialogue form. 
* Because that's the kind of texts they're used to writing?
* =\> Whatever the reason, the classroom is preferable.
