# What is a microworld?

## Introduce meal microworld

Imagine you're really hungry. It's late in the day and you need to decide what you're doing for dinner. This is a problem faced by most of us, repeated day after day.

What does the solution space look like? The usual way to figure this out is by examining a single solution and then seeing how its properties might vary.

A single solution to the whats-for-dinner problem is a single meal. So the solution space encompasses everything that can be considered a single meal: everything from a steak to a snack bar. And of course there's the null solution: not to eat anything at all.

## Open-ended goals: Creativity within constraints. Coming up with a **creative idea**.

We explore this solution space every time we plan a meal. We work under certain constraints, such as availability, our personal preferences, diet plans and even the cultural acceptance of the meal in question. The set of things we are likely to eat is far smaller than the set of all things that we *could* eat. 

That said, we can also be creative with our solutions. Though our goals must conform to a certain shape (say roughly 1000 calories of nutrition), they are also **open-ended**. There are an infinite number of ways to get 1000 calories of nutrition, even taking into account all of the constraints we just mentioned.

Of course, we rarely think about all of these possibilites. We tend to stick to what we know, reducing an infinite vastness to the comfortably familiar. 

I cook pasta a *lot*, and I doubt I'm the only one. 

If I decide to combine pasta with bacon and pesto, I have come up with a potential solution to the whats-for-dinner problem. 
I call this a creative idea in the solution space.

To realise my creative idea, I have to cook.

## Implementation

How will I fry the bacon? Shall I make pesto myself or buy it in a jar? What kind of pasta shall I use, and how should I prepare it?

When I make these decisions, I am trying to realise my abstract idea with a concrete implementation. I am turning a creative idea in my head into something I can put on my plate.

## Evaluation

Once my reified idea is on my plate, the evaluation phase begins. If my solution contains roughly 1000 calories, we can call it a meal. But is it a satisfactory one?

Like the solution space, the evaluation space is infinite. I may have achieved my nutritional goals, but failed my goals of taste. Or maybe my meal was both nutritious and tasty, but it just wasn't *novel* enough. 
We might call judging a meal hopelessly subjective. One person's delicacy is another person's travesty. Yet certain dishes achieve global popularity. The owners of the most famous restaurants probably believe that the popularity of a certain dish can be reliably predicted. 

## Feedback and iteration

An evaluation of the implementation of a creative idea is only useful if it guides future actions. 

Imagine I feel that my home-made pesto failed utterly. This is only a productive thought if the next time I plan a meal, I change the way I acquire pesto. Either I change how I make it, or I buy it ready-made from the supermarket. The success of my updated method will only be seen when I taste my new, modified meal.

In this way I can learn about what succeeds and what fails.

## Learning as a process

**Learning is what happens when someone executes an idea-implementation-evaluation loop, and uses outcomes to guide future iterations.**

**A microworld is an environment that enables a person to iterate an idea-implementation-evaluation loop within a certain domain.**

A supermarket, kitchen and dinner table is a microworld for meals.

## What is *not* a microworld?

Before we look at the many types of microworld that exist, lets think about what things are *not* microworlds. 

### Exams

Consider an exam that requires calculation, like a maths, physics or chemistry exam. Here you can come up with a potential solution, but you generally wouldn't call the process *creative*. You might be able to come up with two different ways of calculating the volume of a certain body, but choosing one of two options is not creativity.

Exam questions are not iterative, whatever their subject area. This is because the evaluation phase, which assigns a value to an implementation, is carried out by the examiner, after the examinee has handed in their exam.

This means that the examinee receives no feedback and thus receives no knowledge they can use to improve their implementation next time.

*A counter-argument is this: no-one ever said you should learn from exams; exams are for showing what you've learnt. Sure, but if we buy the microworlds-are-good-for-learning hypothesis, then a better exam would be to allow someone to come up with a creative idea, and let them implement it, and then evaluate their solution. We still wouldn't have feedback, but we'd know something about what the student has learnt. This approach, as opposed to traditional maths-related exams, allows for creative, open-ended ideas.*

### Essays

You can be more creative in an essay than a maths-related exam, but again essays are lacking in their feedback. Waiting for a grade from a teacher is too slow for effective learning. 

## What kind of microworlds exist today?
* Sports (physical games)
* Music (jamming)
* Creative writing workshops
* Creative artwork (freestyle sketching etc)
* Programming projects
* A startup
