# Microworlds enable learning

* Dewey's laboratories
  * The Child & The Curriculum, description of ideal school, ~ page 52 / location 1071
  * John Dewey envisaged the ideal school for children being made up of (physical) laboratories and workshops.
    * Laboratories and workshops are where we discover (or construct) knowledge (instead of having it handed to us, predigested).
* Papert's microworlds
  * Mindstorms Chapter 5: Microworlds, Incubators of knowledge
* Let’s consider the microworlds in the previous section. How does their structure enable learning?
  * In games, we lose lives. Then we try to achieve our objectives again, with a slightly different strategy. The difference between learning in games and the real world? In games, losing a life doesn’t mean that you really die.
  * In art, we create flops.
    * Arts-based research techniques
    * http://www.tandfonline.com.focus.lib.kth.se/doi/full/10.1080/1743727X.2012.742051#.U1EM9-aSxyE
  * Programming
    * A version control history is a record of learning.
  * Startups
    * Dan Martell: “The key to success is learning faster than your competitors. That’s why startups are able to out innovate the big guys like Microsoft or Facebook – they learn faster and can make decisions faster. That’s the only thing they have at their advantage, so don’t waste it.”
* So a startup environment must differ from an enterprise environment in a way that enables more learning. Is it because startups resemble microworlds in a way that enterprises are not?
    * http://www.tuicool.com/articles/nuABZb
* Think about Machine Learning theories? Which is the better AI, the rule-based system or the one that learns heuristics from experience?

