# Microworlds are engaging

## What is the key to motivation? 

According to Dan Pink, it's autonomy. Roman Krznaric agrees, and uses the following statistic to prove his point: 47% of self-employed people say they are "very satisfied" with their jobs, compared to only 17 percent of those in regular employment{krznaric}.

Here is the table from which he got his data{joywork}: 

% of respondents 
 Full-time Part-time Self-employed 
Very dissatisfied             5.8 3.2 1.6
Dissatisfied                11.2 10.5 4.7
Neutral                     18.7 18.9 12.5
Satisfied                   46.9 48.4 34.4
Very satisfied              17.3 18.9 46.9

There are more than twice as many dissatisfied people working full time compared to those who are self-employed. 

Why would this be?

The report has this to say: 

> This could be attributed to the control that the self-employed have over their work: whilst many work very long hours, their ability to determine when, where and how they work may contribute to their high levels of satisfaction.

If you have the "ability to determing when, where and how" you work, that means you have autonomy over your work.

## Do microworlds provide autonomy?

The first stage of our microworld-defining loop is coming up with an **idea** that obeys the constraints of the *structure* of that microworld.

Imagine you are a self-employed, freelance web designer. You have been tasked with coming up with a new landing page for a coffee shop brand. 

You have autonomy over when you work, where you work, and how you work. You can work only between 22.00 and 04.00. You can work from home. You can use or skeumorphic design, or flat design.

Let's say you try skeumorphic design, but after you **implement** some skeumorphic elements, and **evaluate** them, something seems off. You update your **ideas** and try flat design instead. Much better. 

You exercised your autonomy in *how* you work.

But however much you iterate, you still need to deliver something that looks like a web page. You can't deliver a design for a printed book. Or a design for a 15-minute movie.

Those are the constraints of the *structure* of your web design microworld. 

## What would a microworld look like without autonomy?

Let's imagine our web design microworld without autonomy. 

Your task is still the same: creating a landing page for a coffee shop brand.

But this time, you must work between 09.00 and 17.00 on weekdays. You must work from the office, from your cubicle. You're free to use skeumorphic design or flat design... but your boss *really* likes skeumorphic design.

After **implementing** your initial skeumorphic design **idea**, you **evaluate** it, and as before, you find it lacking.

Unfortunately, you can't change it. Because your boss likes it, and their opinion overrules yours.

The structural constraints of the microworld still apply. But now some arbitrary constraints *also* apply: over where, when and how you work. 

These additional, arbitrary constraints suck the fun right out of the microworld. They make the microworld less engaging. They make it feel like work, not a game.

## What does engagement lead to?

When a microworld allows for autonomy, it is a highly motivating place to experiment in. 

In Minecraft, this motivation leads to people building their first basic block structure. For a band jamming together, or a novice writer, it might lead to the first work they're comfortable sharing with friends. For the budding programmer, it usually leads to their first non-trivial, mostly-working program. 

And that leads to a sense of accomplishment. But that's not where it ends.

After an initial success, the temptation is there to tweak the original, ever so slightly. The first block structure leads to a house; one song, story or program leads to another, similar in structure but differing in detail.

Eventually, we end up with a blockrealm the size of Los Angeles; a band and author with a string of hits; a programmer in charge of a program that serves billions around the world. 

As we argued in the previous section, each iteration of our loop led to learning for all involved. 

But it took the engagement enabled by autonomy to start the loop spinning in the first place. 

---- -------------------
{krznaric} How To Find Fulfilling Work
{joywork} [http://twfold.theworkfoundation.com/assets/docs/publications/145\_Joy\_of\_Work.pdf][1]

---- -------------

* People are engaged with the example microworlds above with a passion that borders on addiction. 
* If we believe that practice leads to ability (as opposed to innate abilities), then engagement -\> practice -\> mastery.
* Quote "Drive", intrinsic vs extrinsic.

* Dan Pink
	* Drive
* Leslie Dickinson
	* Autonomy and motivation a literature review
* Jane McGonigal
	* Reality is broken
* Sami Abuhamdeh and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
	* Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivational Orientations in the Competitive Context: An Examination of Person–Situation Interactions

[1]:	http://twfold.theworkfoundation.com/assets/docs/publications/145_Joy_of_Work.pdf